Some of you, might have already worked with a relational database.
Relational databases have been the de facto standard for persistence for decades.
Up until the advent of NoSQL databases a few years ago,
the word database was synonymous with the relational database.
Let's define what a relational database is.
A relational database is a collection of data items
organized as a set of tables with columns and rows.
Each row in a table can have a unique identifier,
called a primary key.
Rows among multiple tables can be made related using foreign keys.
The structure of a table is predefined,
meaning a table is created with a set of columns.
Rows for that table can only contain those predefined set of columns.
This definition is called a schema.
Some applications might require a more flexible data model.
In lesson three, we'll explore how non-relational,
NoSQL databases provide an alternate data model.
Another important feature of a relational database is its support for transactions.
Transactions are a very powerful feature and can come in handy during various scenarios.
A transaction is a set of operations
executed sequentially and independent of other operations,
backed by an all or nothing guarantee.
This last term, all or nothing is called atomicity.
Let's illustrate transactions with an example.
In a banking application,
a common use case is to transfer money from one account to another.
Let's say, money needs to be transferred from
the salary checking to this college savings account.
This transfer involves two operations.
Debit from the salary checking account here,
and credit to the college savings account here.
It would be catastrophic if the debit succeeds,
but the credit fails.
If this application uses a relational database,
a transaction guarantees that both of these operations happen are none of it.
If one of the operations fail,
then the database is restored to a state before these operations have been attempted.
As you can see, there are certain use cases where
guarantee is provided by a transaction are absolutely needed.